% Announcing the Dick Dowling Digital Archive
% W. Caleb McDaniel 
% April 5, 2012 

This post was originally published on my old blog as [Announcing the Dick Dowling Digital Archive](http://mcdaniel.blogs.rice.edu/?p=210 "Permanent Link: Announcing the Dick Dowling Digital Archive"). 

-----

It gives me great pleasure to announce the unveiling of the Dick Dowling
Digital Archive and the related exhibit, [Dick Dowling and Sabine Pass
in History and
Memory](http://exhibits.library.rice.edu/exhibits/show/dick-dowling).
The collection and the exhibit, both proudly powered by
[Omeka](http://www.omeka.org), were produced by myself and undergraduate
students in Civil War history at Rice University in collaboration with
[the Woodson Research Center](http://library.rice.edu/collections/WRC)
at Fondren Library, the [Houston Area Digital
Archives](http://digital.houstonlibrary.org/cdm/), and the [Humanities
Research Center](http://hrc.rice.edu).

Dick Dowling was an Irish American Houstonian most famous for his role
in a Civil War battle fought at Sabine Pass on September 8, 1863.
Beginning in [the Spring 2011 semester](http://hist246.blogs.rice.edu),
Rice students in HIST 246, “The American Civil War Era,” began locating,
scanning, describing, and writing about historical documents related to
Dowling which were then uploaded into an Omeka collection. Students also
produced four interpretive digital projects that also now reside in the
collection. The Movie Group produced an introductory video ([group
blog](http://dowlingmovie.blogs.rice.edu) and
[video](http://exhibits.library.rice.edu/items/show/766)). The Map Group
produced several maps with ArcGIS showing the past locations of
Dowling’s statue in the city ([group
blog](http://dowlingmap.blogs.rice.edu),
[map](http://exhibits.library.rice.edu/items/show/763), and [map
guide](http://exhibits.library.rice.edu/items/show/764)). The Timeline
Group used [SIMILE](http://www.simile-widgets.org/timeline/) to produce
a dynamic timeline of events ([group
blog](http://dowlingdates.blogs.rice.edu) and
[timeline](http://exhibits.library.rice.edu/exhibits/show/dick-dowling/timeline)).
And the Podcast Group created several audio tours meant to be heard at
various Dowling-related sites in Houston ([group
blog](http://dowlingcast.blogs.rice.edu) and [audio
tours](http://exhibits.library.rice.edu/items/browse?search=&advanced%5B0%5D%5Belement_id%5D=50&advanced%5B0%5D%5Btype%5D=contains&advanced%5B0%5D%5Bterms%5D=Audio+Tour&range=&collection=4&type=&tags=&submit_search=Search)).

Other students in the spring and [fall
semester](http://civilwar.blogs.rice.edu) of 2011 worked to draft,
organize, and lay out the exhibit pages for [The Afterlives of Dick
Dowling](http://exhibits.library.rice.edu/exhibits/show/dick-dowling/afterlives-of-dick-dowling),
the first major section of the Omeka exhibit featuring items in the Dick
Dowling Digital Archive. Students in the fall semester also helped me to
think through the other major section, [Slavery and the Battle of Sabine
Pass](http://exhibits.library.rice.edu/exhibits/show/dick-dowling/slavery-and-sabine-pass),
which I composed in bits and pieces over the last several months.

In a future blog post I hope to say more about how this project
developed. For now, I’m happy to announce its existence and invite you
to take a look around. Please feel free to leave comments, questions, or
corrections here or at dowling-archive AT rice.edu.
